IT Security 2025/2026
Exercise Sheet 8
– Software Composition Analysis –
Ben Swierzy
Publication: 04.12.2025
Deadline: 09.12.2025 14:00
Lightning Survey
Exercise 1 (Flavius, 6×0.5 points). You have been using Flavius for more than two months.
Time to take a closer look how it works. Open the web page in your browser and answer the
following questions: Write your solution into task1.txt.
(1) What is the version of the web server serving the frontend?
(2) What JavaScript framework is used for the frontend?
(3) What is the version of the runtime-core component of that framework?
(4) What HTTP server serves the API backend?
(5) What framework is used for the API backend?
(6) In what programming language is the API backend written?
Note: In most browsers you can use F12 to open the developer tools and analyze network traffic
in the Network tab.
Exercise 2 (Bundler Fingerprints, 7 points). To be able to run different methods such as
software composition analysis on JavaScript bundles, we need to ensure that our artifact at
hand is indeed a bundle. In this task, you will implement a detector for the runtime of the
Webpack bundler.
Conceptually, you need to locate the fingerprint below inside the JavaScript input file. However,
as bundles are minified you can neither rely on the names of any identifiers nor on string matching
algorithms. Therefore, your comparison needs to traverse the AST of the bundle. It should
try to match the fingerprint AST as a subtree in the bundle AST by comparing only the
node types. You can ignore that the order of properties in ObjectExpressions can sometimes
be shuffled by minifiers and rely on the order provided in the snippet. If a match is found,
Webpack has successfully been detected. Otherwise, we do not know anything about the bundle
1 function n(e) {
2 if (t[e]) return t[e].x;
3 var i = t[e] = {
4 i: e,
5 l: !1,
6 x: {}
7 };
8 return r[e]. call (i.x, i, i.x, n), i.l = !0, i.x
9 }
Listing 1: Minified Webpack runtime.
Please take a look at the following additional material inside the Git repository:
1
• webpack_fingerprinter.mjs: Extend this scaffold with your commented script.
• webpack: This folder contains Webpack bundles which should match your fingerprint.
• otherjs: This folder contains other bundles and scripts which do not include the Webpack
runtime.
You need to run npm ci to perform a clean install of the acorn and acorn-walk packages.
The script can be run with node webpack_fingerprinter.mjs path/to/file.js if you have
NodeJS installed.
2