IT Security 2025/2026
Exercise Sheet 14
– Web Authentication Schemes –
Melina Hoffmann
Publication: 29.01.2026
Deadline: 03.02.2025 14:00
Lightning Survey
Exercise 1 (eID Fraud Scenarios, 1.5 points). For each of the following short scenarios, describe
concisely (1-2 sentences each) and precisely at which step of the online authentication process
as described in the lecture the malicious or fraudulent action is detected. You can assume that
all other parts of the eID system are benign and work as specified. You can also assume that
the attacker in each scenario tries to get as far as they can (e.g. tries to forge certificates) but
cannot obtain secret information beyond what is specified (e.g. no insider access to authorities
like the German Federal Printing Office). If you make further assumptions, please state them
together with your answer. Submit everything in eid-fraud.txt.
a) A pickpocket has obtained the government-issued identification card (Personalausweis) of
somebody else and tries to use it to open a bank account in the original card holder’s
name.
b) A fraudster has forged a government-issued identification card (Personalausweis) including
the integrated chip for an entirely fake identity and tries to obtain a SIM card in the name
of this fake identity.
c) A malicious actor wants to obtain personal data from various citizens. The malicious
actor has replicated a government service website and has lured a citizen onto the spoofed
website, who has now started an eID authentication process on the spoofed website.
Exercise 2 (sPACE-Attack, 3.5 points). Research the sPACE attack (CVE-2024–23674) on the
German eID scheme and answer the following questions. You can use the following blog post1 as
a starting point. State all of your corresponding sources and write your solution into space.txt.
a) What is the goal of the attack? (max. 2 sentences)
b) Where in the eID system and processes lies the exploited vulnerability? (max. 3 sentences)
c) Which requirements need to be fulfilled by the attacker and on the user’s side for a suc-
cessful attack? (max. 3 sentences)
d) Describe the sequence of steps for the attack. (max. 15 sentences)
e) When and by whom was this attack made public? (1 sentence)
f) What was the public response of the BSI (Federal Office for Information Security) to this
attack, especially with regards to the assessment of the severity and recommended actions
for citizens to protect themselves? (max. 2 sentences)
1https://ctrlalt.medium.com/space-attack-spoofing-eids-password-authenticated-connection-
establishment-11561e5657b1
1
Exercise 3 (User Agent Header, 2 points). For each of the following User Agent strings, briefly
state which information about the browser can be inferred from each component of the string.
State all of your corresponding sources and write your solution into user-agent.txt.
a) Mozilla/5.0 (Android 4.4; Mobile; rv:70.0) Gecko/70.0 Firefox/70.0
b) Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Linux x86_64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/131.0.0.0
Safari/537.36
Exercise 4 (Web Authentication Implementation Scenarios, 3 points). For each of the following
scenarios, state which of the authentication schemes discussed in the lecture is the most suitable.
Briefly (2-4 sentences total) justify your answer by explaining for all schemes why they are
(un)suitable. If you make any additional assumptions, state them with your answer. Submit
your solution in scenarios.txt.
a) A rural German town wants to offer a special reduced fare taxi service to their young
residents on weekends to reduce risky behavior, e.g., drunk driving or sharing rides with
untrustworthy strangers. To prevent abuse of this cheap offer, participants should need to
register with a special app, which also automatically verifies their eligibility (age between
16 and 27, resident of the municipality).
b) A global online social media platform wants to give all its customers the option to link
a secondary device (physical factor) to their account for two factor authentication (2FA).
The customers should be able to decide whether they want to participate or not.
2