Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn
Master Course Computer Science
Written Exam
Semester: Winter 2022 Exam Period: 1. ☐ 2. x
Module Name: IT Security
Module Number: MA-INF 3236 Date of Exam: 13.03.2023
Examiner: Prof. Dr. Michael Meier
To be filled by the Student:
Last name:
First name:
Matriculation number:
Course of Study
Master in Computer Science Master in Education☐ secondary subject other
To be filled by the Examiner:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Σ
10 10 10 10 1.0 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 150
To be filled by the Examiner:
Grading:
*Grades: very good (1,0; 1,3) good (1,7; 2,0; 2,3) satisfactory (2,7; 3,0; 3,3) sufficient (3,7; 4,0) not
sufficient (5,0)
Date:
Signature of Examiner
Name: Matriculation number:
Task 1: (Wireless Security - Basics and Jamming)
a)
3+3+4 points
Name the three antenna types presented in the lecture. Point out one of those types that
is used more frequently by attackers that aim to attack wireless communication. Give two
reasons why this type is usually preferred over the others.
b) Explain how the relay attack works with regards to passive keyless entry systems. What
security strategy is circumvented by this kind of attack?
c) Name a protocol aware jamming attack and a protocol oblivious jamming attack on
802.11a Wi-Fi. Explain the differences between a protocol aware jamming attack and a
protocol oblivious jamming attack with regards to 802.11a Wi-Fi.
3
Task 2: (Wireless Security - Wi-Fi Security) 4+2+4 points
a) Decide for each of the following statements, which are true and which are false. Mark them
accordingly using 'T' for true and 'F' for false.
_ An access point of a Wi-Fi network secured by MAC-address filtering only accepts
connections by devices using a MAC address matching to its pre-set list of MAC
addresses.
_ Open System Authentication describes a method, where any client can connect to a
Wi-Fi network without knowledge of any secrets.
_ WPA, the successor of WEP, while still using the broken RC4 was a major redesign, of
which WPA2 adopted most aspects.
_ WEP supports the different keylengths 32 bits, 40 bits, and 104 bits.
b) What weakness of RC4 does the FMS attack exploit?
c) You are eavesdropping all nearby Wi-Fi packets. You notice a WEP encrypted
communication between two devices. What packet types can you use to perform the FMS
attack as presented in the lecture? Explain what makes these packets usable.
Task 3: (Wireless Security - Device Identification)
a)
3+3+4 points
Give an example for why utilizing device identification techniques can benefit a defensive
actor as discussed in the lecture. In what way can the defensive actor use identifying data
in your example?
b) Name a collectible characteristic of a wireless transmission to be used as indirect device
identifying data (DID) and explain why it qualifies as an indirect DID.
c) Assume you want to know, whether a target device is still sending and in range of your
antenna. It is communicating to a stationary receiver that is always accessible and
responsive. Its communication is completely encrypted, however, so you have no access
to the header or content of the sent packets.
Name a passive device identification technique presented in the lecture that you could be
using in that scenario. Why does it work? What drawbacks does your suggested technique
have?
Task 4: (Side Channel Attacks)
a)
4+3+3 points
In the Rowhammer attack, an attacker flips a bit at some memory address, without the
computer noticing. Give two examples where flipping a single bit compromises the security
of the system and describe how the security is compromised.
b) Compared to brute forcing a cryptographic algorithm, what advantage do side channels
provide?
c) Why does measuring power consumption of a CPU leak information? Give two examples
where measuring the power consumption leaks information.
Task 5: (Fuzzing) 2+4+4 points
a) When is instrumentation used and what is done during the instrumentation step?
b) Which kind of vulnerabilities does the AddressSanitizer detect and how is it done?
c) Given the following list of labels and the empty Diagram:
Please assign the numbers to the list of labels, so that the diagram represents the
Coverage Guided Fuzzing Algorithm.
1
() Seed Files 2
() Mutation
3
() Selection
() Code Coverage Evaluation 4
() Solution
() Crash
No
5
Yes
6
Task 6: (Centralized Key Management) 6+4 points
For a secure group communication, a secret key can be established for a user pair by the
Needham-Schroeder protocol.
a) Write down the Needham-Schroeder protocol.
b) Explain the weakness of the protocol in case of a stolen session key.
Task 7: (Distributed Group Key Management)
K1.0
Ko.0
K1.1
(m972/2 4+4+2 points
K2.0 K2.1 K2.2 K2.3
น2 Us U4
Figure 1: Key tree
The key tree in figure 1 is used for the key management of a group G with the user
i∈{1,2,3,4}.
น
a) The TGDH (Tree Based Group Diffie Hellman) protocol is used for the key management.
Write down the group key calculation of the user u1.
b) For comparison write down the group key calculation of the user u₁ if in a group of four
users the ITW (Imgemarsson-Tang-Wong) protocol is used.
c) How many messages are exchanged by the TGDH and the ITW protocol if the user us joins
the group?
Task 8: (E-Voting System)
a) Write down the basic mechanisms of an e-voting system.
b) Describe the four steps of an e-voting system.
2+8 points
Task 9: (Public Key Infrastructure) tebnegiftsini 1ee 9+1 points
Serial
Number
1 Serial
Number
3 Serial
Number
4
Issuer P Issuer P Issuer N
NotBefore 16/08/2017 NotBefore 16/10/2017 NotBefore 15/11/2017
NotAfter 30/05/2022 NotAfter 31/11/2018 NotAfter 30/08/2020
Subject P Subject N Subject A
Table 1: Certificates of a PKI
The user A signs a document at 01/11/2017, 16/09/2018 and 16/01/2019. More details about
the certificates is given in table 1.
a) Determine the result of the verification on 20/09/2019 based on the shell, hybrid and chain
model.
b) What is the reason for the distribution of certificate revocation lists?
Task 10: (Threat Intelligence) 3+3+3+1 points
a) Name the key concepts of information security an define each in one sentence.
b) Name and map the main motivation for three Threat Actor type..
c)
d)
Explain one step (of your choice) of the "Intrusion Kill Chain". Name the step before and
after.
Is scanning the target's public server for open ports a suitable technique for footprinting?
Give a reason.
Task 11: (Web Security)
a) Name the three phases of an Single Sign-On (SSO) protocol.
1.5+6+2.5 points
b) Draw arrows for every communication step between different parties as in the Malicious
Endpoint (Broken User Authentication) attack in chronologically correct order, i.e., the
earlier the higher. The tip of the arrow should point to the party receiving the initial
message of that communication step.
c) Mark your arrows with the number of the phase they belong to.
Victim SP
(https://honestSp.com)
Honest IdP
(https://honestidP.com)
regEndp authEndp
Attacker IdP
(https://attackerldP.com)
Discovery tokenEndp
Task 12: (Privacy Enhancing Technologies)
a)
2+1+1+6 points
Explain the difference between univariate and multivariate microaggregation.
b) Define k-anonymity as discussed in the lecture.
c) Define attribute disclosure as discussed in the lecture.
d) Decide for each of the following statements, which are true and which are false. Mark
them accordingly using 'T' for true and 'F' for false.
_ Considering the GDPR, data is not subject to a purpose limitation.
_ Encryption is an anonymization technique.
_ In local recoding a given value might be replaced with different values.
_ Quasi identifiers always allow to uniquely identify a natural person.
_ A successful membership disclosure attack can infer that an individual is
represented in a dataset with high probability.
_Hashing a dataset twice turns it anonymous.
Task 13: (Anonymization)
a) Define the semi-honest adversary.
b) Define the prosecutor attacker model.
c) Which goals should be reached by an oblivious transfer?
d) Describe the advantage of GRR3 and how it is reached.
2+2+2+4 points
Task 14: (Anomaly Detection) 2+5+3 points
a) Decide for each of the following statements, which are true and which are false. Mark them
accordingly using 'T' for true and 'F' for false.
_The Mahalanobis distance is a multivariate metric for calculating the distance
between a point and a distribution.
_DBSCAN requires the user to specify the number of clusters in the data.
b) Give the algorithm for a Support Vector Machine (SVM). Clearly state inputs and outputs of
the algorithm.
c) Consider the dataset shown in the figure below. Explain if an SVM is capable of separating
normal and anomalous data points. Describe a method you can utilize to make the dataset
suitable for an SVM to easily separate the normal and anomalous points.
-10
Task 15: (Statistics)
a)
4+6 points
Decide for each of the following statements, which are true and which are false. Mark them accordingly using 'T' for true and 'F' for false.
_ Given positive ratios x1,..., x their harmonic mean is H(x1,.. X") =
_The Spearman Correlation Coefficient computes the correlation of a nominal
feature.
_ The Principle Component Analysis embeds a given point cloud into a space of higher dimension.
_ In the t-test, we have to assume that the two given groups are approximately
normally distributed.
b) A new virus scanner detects malware with a recall Rec = TP/(TP+FN) of 100% and a
specificity Spec = TN/(TN+FP) of 99.9%. A cloud service provider operates a server with
10,050,000 unencrypted files. We assume that 50,000 files are infected. The virus scanner
scans all unencrypted files.
Fill out the confusion matrix and compute the accuracy of the virus scanner.
File is infected
File is reported by the
scanner
Tp
File is not infected
Fp
File is not reported by the
scanner
FN TN